085 
FXUS63 KIND 091838
AFDIND

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Indianapolis IN
238 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

.KEY MESSAGES...

- Strong to severe storms possible, mainly this evening into 
  tonight, with damaging winds and heavy rain/localized flooding
  the primary threats

- Additional rain possible at times Friday through the weekend with
  localized flooding possible

- Warmer and drier again next week, though with more modest humidity
  than experienced the first week of the month

&&

.DISCUSSION (This evening through Thursday)...
Issued at 238 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

Satellite imagery depicts a well defined MCV near St. Louis 
progressing eastward. This will likely be the main source of lift 
this afternoon and evening, with an MCS likely developing over south 
central IL after 4PM. Model guidance is still widely varied on 
specific placement of this MCS, but given MCV and LLJ placement, the 
current expectation is for this MCS to move through far SW portions 
of central Indiana between 7-11PM this evening. Sounding analysis 
shows a quasi-inverted "V" sounding in the lowers 1km of which is 
allowing for 1000+ J/kg of DCAPE. This should allow for micro-scale 
bowing segments along the cold pool, with a damaging wind gust 
threat during this same time period. Within any organized segments, 
a weak tornadic spin up is possible but given LCL height and weak 
boundary layer shear, this threat should remain very isolated. 

The next threat tonight will reside with the potential for a remnant 
boundary to develop following the passage of the MCV. This boundary 
coupled with a consistent 30-40kt LLJ could lead to training 
convection south of a Bloomington to Columbus line between 02-08Z 
overnight. If this does occur pockets of 2-4" over a 6 hour period 
will be possible, with localized flooding threat. As the LLJ weakens 
tomorrow morning, convection will eventually dissipate, with most 
areas becoming dry by 10Z. 


Friday through Saturday: 

Another upper level wave will move slowly through the region Friday 
into Saturday with a weak surface boundary expected to pass from 
north to south through central Indiana during the afternoon and 
evening. Models are starting to come to a better agreement on 
timing, with convection likely to occur between 4PM and 10PM from 
north to south across the region. Shear will be rather weak this 
time around, and therefor the severe risk is low for Friday. That 
said, there is enough destabilization through a deep saturated 
column for an isolated wet microburst to be possible. A quick inch 
is possible over a 30min period with these storms as well, but the 
movement on these cells should be fast enough to limit the flood 
threat for the afternoon and evening hours. 

Late tomorrow evening, this boundary is expected to stall near or 
south of central Indiana, with another nocturnal LLJ expected to 
form. If this boundary stays within central Indiana, there is some 
potential for an additional flooding concern Friday night, but 
confidence is low on this occurring at this time. 


Sunday through Next Week:

The strong upper ridging centered over the Rockies during the second 
half of the weekend will shift east into the Mississippi and Ohio 
Valleys for much of next week bringing a return to a warmer and 
drier pattern for central Indiana. Highs will return to the upper 
80s and lower 90s through the middle of next week. Unlike the recent 
high heat in late June and the first few days of July...temperatures 
and dewpoints should be lower through the period which will keep 
heat indices largely manageable from a heat stress standpoint... 
peaking in the mid and upper 90s. 

A few lingering storms are possible Sunday over southern counties as 
an upper trough axis shifts away to the south The presence of a 
strong mid level cap will largely mitigate convective risks from 
late Sunday through Tuesday. By Wednesday and Thursday...mid level 
temperatures will fall weakening the cap with a greater opportunity 
for isolated convection focused largely during the afternoon and 
evening. A more pronounced threat for thunderstorms will come late 
week into next weekend as the ridge suppresses and a cold front sags 
south from the Great Lakes. In the wake of this frontal passage...a 
cooler airmass will expand into the region.

&&

.AVIATION (18Z TAF Issuance)...
Issued at 135 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

Impacts:

- Showers and storms possible at all sites this evening into the 
  overnight

Discussion:

VFR conditions will remain throughout the afternoon into the 
evening. After 22Z, a MCV will push into Indiana with a broken line 
of thunderstorms expected at KHUF and KBMG through 02Z. A remnant 
boundary behind this MCV coupled with a LLJ will likely lead to 
additional thunderstorms between 02-08Z overnight. Greatest threat 
will be at KBMG, but all sites could see a thunderstorm.

MVFR ceilings could be possible tomorrow morning, but confidence
is low. 

Winds will be light out of the southwest(200-230 degrees) during the 
day, becoming variable after 00Z as the MCV pushes through.


&&

.IND WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

AVIATION...Updike
DISCUSSION...Ryan/Updike