085 
FXUS63 KIND 091838
AFDIND

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Indianapolis IN
238 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

.KEY MESSAGES...

- Strong to severe storms possible, mainly this evening into 
  tonight, with damaging winds and heavy rain/localized flooding
  the primary threats

- Additional rain possible at times Friday through the weekend with
  localized flooding possible

- Warmer and drier again next week, though with more modest humidity
  than experienced the first week of the month

&&

.DISCUSSION (This evening through Thursday)...
Issued at 238 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

Satellite imagery depicts a well defined MCV near St. Louis 
progressing eastward. This will likely be the main source of lift 
this afternoon and evening, with an MCS likely developing over south 
central IL after 4PM. Model guidance is still widely varied on 
specific placement of this MCS, but given MCV and LLJ placement, the 
current expectation is for this MCS to move through far SW portions 
of central Indiana between 7-11PM this evening. Sounding analysis 
shows a quasi-inverted "V" sounding in the lowers 1km of which is 
allowing for 1000+ J/kg of DCAPE. This should allow for micro-scale 
bowing segments along the cold pool, with a damaging wind gust 
threat during this same time period. Within any organized segments, 
a weak tornadic spin up is possible but given LCL height and weak 
boundary layer shear, this threat should remain very isolated. 

The next threat tonight will reside with the potential for a remnant 
boundary to develop following the passage of the MCV. This boundary 
coupled with a consistent 30-40kt LLJ could lead to training 
convection south of a Bloomington to Columbus line between 02-08Z 
overnight. If this does occur pockets of 2-4" over a 6 hour period 
will be possible, with localized flooding threat. As the LLJ weakens 
tomorrow morning, convection will eventually dissipate, with most 
areas becoming dry by 10Z. 


Friday through Saturday: 

Another upper level wave will move slowly through the region Friday 
into Saturday with a weak surface boundary expected to pass from 
north to south through central Indiana during the afternoon and 
evening. Models are starting to come to a better agreement on 
timing, with convection likely to occur between 4PM and 10PM from 
north to south across the region. Shear will be rather weak this 
time around, and therefor the severe risk is low for Friday. That 
said, there is enough destabilization through a deep saturated 
column for an isolated wet microburst to be possible. A quick inch 
is possible over a 30min period with these storms as well, but the 
movement on these cells should be fast enough to limit the flood 
threat for the afternoon and evening hours. 

Late tomorrow evening, this boundary is expected to stall near or 
south of central Indiana, with another nocturnal LLJ expected to 
form. If this boundary stays within central Indiana, there is some 
potential for an additional flooding concern Friday night, but 
confidence is low on this occurring at this time. 


Sunday through Next Week:

The strong upper ridging centered over the Rockies during the second 
half of the weekend will shift east into the Mississippi and Ohio 
Valleys for much of next week bringing a return to a warmer and 
drier pattern for central Indiana. Highs will return to the upper 
80s and lower 90s through the middle of next week. Unlike the recent 
high heat in late June and the first few days of July...temperatures 
and dewpoints should be lower through the period which will keep 
heat indices largely manageable from a heat stress standpoint... 
peaking in the mid and upper 90s. 

A few lingering storms are possible Sunday over southern counties as 
an upper trough axis shifts away to the south The presence of a 
strong mid level cap will largely mitigate convective risks from 
late Sunday through Tuesday. By Wednesday and Thursday...mid level 
temperatures will fall weakening the cap with a greater opportunity 
for isolated convection focused largely during the afternoon and 
evening. A more pronounced threat for thunderstorms will come late 
week into next weekend as the ridge suppresses and a cold front sags 
south from the Great Lakes. In the wake of this frontal passage...a 
cooler airmass will expand into the region.

&&

.AVIATION (18Z TAF Issuance)...
Issued at 135 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

Impacts:

- Showers and storms possible at all sites this evening into the 
  overnight

Discussion:

VFR conditions will remain throughout the afternoon into the 
evening. After 22Z, a MCV will push into Indiana with a broken line 
of thunderstorms expected at KHUF and KBMG through 02Z. A remnant 
boundary behind this MCV coupled with a LLJ will likely lead to 
additional thunderstorms between 02-08Z overnight. Greatest threat 
will be at KBMG, but all sites could see a thunderstorm.

MVFR ceilings could be possible tomorrow morning, but confidence
is low. 

Winds will be light out of the southwest(200-230 degrees) during the 
day, becoming variable after 00Z as the MCV pushes through.


&&

.IND WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

AVIATION...Updike
DISCUSSION...Ryan/Updike

246 
FXUS63 KIND 091735
AFDIND

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Indianapolis IN
135 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

.KEY MESSAGES...

- Strong to severe storms possible, mainly this evening into 
  tonight, with damaging winds and heavy rain/localized flooding
  the primary threats

- Additional rain possible at times Friday through the weekend with
  localized flooding possible

- Warmer and drier again next week, though with more modest humidity
  than experienced the first week of the month

&&

.FORECAST UPDATE...
Issued at 938 AM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

A few updates to the forecast this morning. The primary change was 
to the ongoing cloud cover and patchy fog this morning. An area of 
dense fog progressed NE into the Indianapolis Metro area this 
morning, with a few pockets of less than 1/2mi visibility. This has 
slowly improved over the last few hours, with some lingering low 
level cloud decks still remaining. Increased heat fluxes throughout 
the morning should lead to mixing in the PBL and breaks in the sky 
cover by 11AM.

The other changes are related to the evening and overnight 
thunderstorm chances. CAMs are widely varied on placement and timing 
on convection later today leading to a lower confidence level in the 
forecast. That said, the forecast currently is focused on the 
presence of the nocturnal LLJ as this will be the primary convective 
forcing. Conceptual models point towards some substance on the N/NE 
side of this LLJ of which should lead to lower shower and storm 
coverage north of I-70 this evening, with a quasi-organized line 
across southern Indiana. Damaging wind gusts and the potential for 
an isolated tornado are still the expected hazards from 8PM through 
1AM.

&&

.DISCUSSION (Today through Wednesday)...
Issued at 257 AM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

TODAY AND TONIGHT -

Aside from some patchy fog in the outlying and favored areas in the 
light winds and high humidity airmass, expect generally quiet 
weather this morning, with thunderstorm chances ramping up through 
the day as the airmass destabilizes and a convectively enhanced 
upper level disturbance approaches the area.

CAMs in general are depicting the evolution of one or more clusters 
of storms into a linear structure late in the day into the overnight 
hours tonight, with primarily a concern for a few damaging wind 
gusts. Deep layer shear is modest but sufficient, and may be 
enhanced slightly beyond what guidance depicts by the aforementioned 
MCV. Diurnal timing is not ideal though moderately strong 
instability should remain in place into the overnight hours - 
approaching and possibly exceeding MUCAPE values of 2000 J/kg. 
Seasonably high wet-bulb zero values will limit hail threat to 
primarily small hail in the stronger cores absent any more discrete 
convection, which appears unlikely, and while a brief QLCS spin-up 
cannot be ruled out, damaging winds in a seasonable setting of a 
cold-pool driven MCS will be the primary concern.

Despite precipitable water values approaching 2 inches, well in 
excess of the climatological 90th percentile, the (mostly) 
progressive CAM solutions do give some optimism that despite 
undeniable heavy rain potential, hydrologic threat should be 
relatively limited with today and tonight's convection, though 
mesoscale reorientation of the low level environment in the form of 
boundaries and the larger scale low to mid level flow will always be 
a concern in such setups, and the slight risk for excessive rainfall 
day one is certainly reasonable.

Overall, current expectation is for a broken line of storms to 
possibly move into central Indiana during the evening hours, perhaps 
just prior to nightfall, and push through the area to the 
east/southeast - with southwestern portions of the area the most 
likely area for both severe and hydrologic concerns.

FRIDAY INTO SUNDAY -

Another upper level wave will move slowly through the region Friday 
into Saturday, though models differ in their handling and intensity 
of the disturbance. A continued moist airmass will promote at least 
moderate destabilization, and one or more clusters of storms will be 
possible Friday into Friday night and perhaps on Saturday as well, 
though the threat will lessen and shift southward with time, and be 
focused primarily along remnant boundaries from previous convection, 
lessening the predictability as time goes on.

An isolated strong to severe threat cannot be entirely ruled out, 
though hydro concerns will likely be slightly more pressing as the 
area has been decently wet in recent weeks, and the aforementioned 
plentiful moisture combined with what may be fairly slow storm 
motions outside of more organized clusters could present a localized 
flash flood threat - WPC excessive rainfall outlooks outline this 
well.

NEXT WEEK -

The predominant story next week will be a reassertion of summertime 
heat as a brief pseudo-Rex block pattern forms with the western 
CONUS ridge sliding back eastward atop weak upper level low pressure 
to our south, gradually reconnecting with the Bermuda high over the 
southeast. Temperatures will climb back towards the 90 degree mark 
in spots, though with slightly more reasonable dewpoints than the 
first week of the month, keeping max apparent temperatures still 
toasty but far more manageable in the low to mid 90s.

The high pressure aloft and at the surface will keep the area dry 
for the most part, though airmass thunderstorms cannot be entirely 
ruled out near peak heating many days. That said, these are quite 
low predictability days ahead of time and will not merit mentionable 
PoPs on most days.

&&

.AVIATION (18Z TAF Issuance)...
Issued at 135 PM EDT Thu Jul 9 2026

Impacts:

- Showers and storms possible at all sites this evening into the 
  overnight

Discussion:

VFR conditions will remain throughout the afternoon into the 
evening. After 22Z, a MCV will push into Indiana with a broken line 
of thunderstorms expected at KHUF and KBMG through 02Z. A remnant 
boundary behind this MCV coupled with a LLJ will likely lead to 
additional thunderstorms between 02-08Z overnight. Greatest threat 
will be at KBMG, but all sites could see a thunderstorm.

MVFR ceilings could be possible tomorrow morning, but confidence
is low. 

Winds will be light out of the southwest(200-230 degrees) during the 
day, becoming variable after 00Z as the MCV pushes through.

&&

.IND WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...Updike
AVIATION...Updike
DISCUSSION...Nield